File expiry shortcut (#60)
coecms/coecms.github.io: posts/2023-03-30-file-expiry-shortcut.md

---
layout: post
title: Quick tip - Feed `nci-file-expiry` output back into itself
author: Dale Roberts
categories: storage, disk
---

# Quick tip - Feed `nci-file-expiry` output back into itself

> Quite often, you may need to recover many files from quarantine on Gadi that match a particular pattern. Unfortunately, the commands provided by NCI seem to make this particularly difficult, as the output of `nci-file-expiry list-quarantine` looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Quite often, you may need to recover many files from quarantine on Gadi that match a particular pattern. Unfortunately, this is not simple as the output of `nci-file-expiry list-quarantine` looks like this:
```

Reviewer: just removing the NCI reference :-)

Author: Awww... I'm not wrong though!

```
8a17868a-25ec-40bf-a41d-264eb3505da8  2023-03-17 00:22:38  v45     528.0K  /scratch/v45/dr4292/tmp/tmpsuh6nuuu
994065d8-1e09-488f-aa1a-90ca1457609a  2023-03-17 00:22:38  v45       4.0K  /scratch/v45/dr4292/tmp/tmpfg8_ecs4
2fb7c18c-d415-47d5-a127-690a6a02d929  2023-03-17 00:22:38  v45       4.0K  /scratch/v45/dr4292/tmp/tmpgqno3ul4
ca649efd-ecbb-4225-b5cd-0432d916f280  2023-03-17 00:22:38  v45       4.0K  /scratch/v45/dr4292/tmp/tmp2qa21xk1
856bf663-8a4c-44bd-a1cf-8aeed3bbf639  2023-03-17 00:22:38  v45     512.0K  /scratch/v45/dr4292/tmp/tmp7mt1e23p
...
```
and `nci-file-expiry recover` expects this:
```
$ nci-file-expiry recover 856bf663-8a4c-44bd-a1cf-8aeed3bbf639 /scratch/v45/dr4292/tmp/tmp7mt1e23p
```
and `nci-file-expiry batch-recover` expects a file.

> Fortunately, with a bit of `bash` trickery, it is possible to feed the output of one command to another _as if it were a file_. In this case, we can feed `nci-file-expiry list-quarantine` output back in to `nci-file-expiry batch-recover`. Lets imagine we're looking for files that match the pattern `*.ice_daily.nc`. Here is the command that does this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fortunately, with a bit of `bash` trickery, it is possible to feed the output of one command to another _as if it were a file_. In this case, we can feed `nci-file-expiry list-quarantine` output back in to `nci-file-expiry batch-recover`. Let's imagine we're looking for files that match the pattern `*.ice_daily.nc`. Here is the command that does this:
```

```
$ nci-file-expiry batch-recover <( nci-file-expiry list-quarantined | grep .ice_daily.nc | while read uuid a b c d path; do echo $uuid $path; done )
```

> Its fairly complicated, so lets break it down, starting with the commands in brackets:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's fairly complicated, so let's break it down, starting with the commands in brackets:
```

```
nci-file-expiry list-quarantined | grep .ice_daily.nc | while read uuid a b c d path; do echo $uuid $path; done
```

> The piping output to `grep` part is pretty standard, but whats less common is piping the results into a loop afterwards. `bash` considers the entire loop construct as a single command, so you can pipe command output or redirect files into one as you would any other command. The loop itself:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The piping output to `grep` part is pretty standard, but what is less common is piping the results into a loop afterwards. `bash` considers the entire loop construct as a single command, so you can pipe command output or redirect files into one as you would any other command. The loop itself:
```

```
while read uuid a b c d path; do echo $uuid $path; done
```
`list-quarantined` output has 6 columns, but `batch-recover` is expecting a file with 2 columns, which correspond to the first and last columns of the `list-quarantined` output. This loop reads in the `grep`'d `list-quarantined` output line-by-line, saves each column into a different variable, and `echo`'s the ones we need. The rest are discarded. So running those commands connected with pipes gives us this:
```
$ nci-file-expiry list-quarantined | grep .ice_daily.nc | while read uuid a b c d path; do echo $uuid $path; done
813ff7b2-381b-430b-a423-f32b449bf710 /scratch/v45/dr4292/20200222.ice_daily.nc
9aa317e3-7763-4af5-a19b-d07a7d6c2d90 /scratch/v45/dr4292/20200223.ice_daily.nc
28b0d00c-e9fc-4e5e-adae-39a817d0fb51 /scratch/v45/dr4292/20200224.ice_daily.nc
8a17868a-25ec-40bf-a41d-264eb3505da8 /scratch/v45/dr4292/20200225.ice_daily.nc
...
```
```{note}

> There are many ways to orgainse columnated data in `bash`. The `while read echo` variant above is my preference. If you prefer piping to `awk` or `cut`, substitute that instead. As long as the output looks like the output above, the next bit will work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many ways to organise columnated data in `bash`. The `while read echo` variant above is my preference. If you prefer piping to `awk` or `cut`, substitute that instead. As long as the output looks like the output above, the next bit will work.
```

```

> To turn this into a "file" that `batch-recover` is happy to deal with, we can take advantage of [process substitution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Process_substitution). This tricks `batch-recover` into treating the output of the above command it as if it were a file, even though nothing is ever written to disk. So by wrapping the above command in `<( ... )`, its output becomes, for all intents and purposes, the contents of a file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To turn this into a "file" that `batch-recover` is happy to deal with, we can take advantage of [process substitution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Process_substitution). This tricks `batch-recover` into treating the output of the above command as if it were a file, even though nothing is ever written to disk. So by wrapping the above command in `<( ... )`, its output becomes, for all intents and purposes, the contents of a file.
```

Process substitution enables a few neat tricks. For instance, if you need to `diff` the output of two commands, you do not need to write the output to temporary files first, you can simply run:
```
$ diff <( command_1 ) <( command_2 )
```

> You can also add an additional `<` operator to redirect this output to `stdin`. The original version of this command posted on slack and the ACCESS-Hive used a this to get the output of `list-quarantine` into the loop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also add an additional `<` operator to redirect this output to `stdin`. The original version of this command posted on slack and the ACCESS-Hive used this to get the output of `list-quarantine` into the loop.
```

```
while read uuid a b c d path; do echo $uuid $path; done < <( nci-file-expiry list-quarantined | grep .ice_daily.nc )
```

> There are restrictions on using process substitution, however. The `seek` instruction cannot be used on these "files", meaning that they can't be used in place of structured data (e.g. netCDF). For simple things like this though, that isn't relevant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, there are restrictions on using process substitution. The `seek` instruction cannot be used on these "files", meaning that they can't be used in place of structured data (e.g. netCDF). For simple things like this though, that isn't relevant.
```

This is a lot to remember, so we recommend placing the following in your `~/.bashrc` file:
```
function recover_pattern () {
    nci-file-expiry batch-recover <( nci-file-expiry list-quarantined | grep "${1}" | while read uuid a b c d path; do echo $uuid $path; done )
}
```
And when you log into Gadi again you'll be able to run:
```
$ recover_pattern .ice_daily.nc
```

> for the same effect.

Reviewer 2: Is it worth pointing out the limits on what can be in the string passed to the function? Like no regex for example.

I also wonder if there is some utility in making it easy to say "I want to recover files from the directory that I am in". I can imagine users going to a place, finding files that are missing and want to just get those ones back.

Perhaps a function to find missing files from the current directory would also be useful?

Reviewer: It might be for the future, but for the moment, considering how busy Dale is right now, I think we should just go ahead as it is. I like the idea of having more tools to make this easier, but I also think we should focus on users managing their storage better and it should be NCI tasks to improve their own file-expiry scripts. You could suggest that to them in your next meeting :-)

Author: You can absolutely pass regex to the function. Its just the argument to `grep`, regex is totally valid. As is passing `$PWD`, which will recover everything from the current directory. I'll add a sentence about this in the post.
